Incident reporting fall 2024 2 (#1)
ryancdickson/www.ccadb.org: cas/incident-report.md

## Incident Reporting

> Systems, processes, and people aren't perfect. Omissions and deviations from expected outcomes are sometimes unavoidable. However, when omissions or deviations are discovered, the underlying issues (i.e., root causes) must be identified and remediated to discourage future recurrence. Formally documenting these cases, in the form of an Incident Report or Audit Finding Report, promotes a thorough understanding of contributing factors and facilitates clear communication of remediation plans, while also fostering a culture of continuous improvement within the Web PKI ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Systems, processes, and people aren't perfect. Omissions and deviations from expected outcomes can sometimes happen. However, when omissions or deviations are discovered, the underlying issues (i.e., root causes) need to be identified and remediated to discourage future recurrence. Formally documenting these cases, in the form of an Incident Report or Audit Finding Report, promotes a thorough understanding of contributing factors and facilitates clear communication of remediation plans, while also fostering a culture of continuous improvement within the Web PKI ecosystem.
```

> This page describes the CCADB Incident and Audit Reporting Framework and corresponding guidelines. For questions, contact support [at] ccadb [dot] org.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page describes the CCADB Incident and Audit Finding Reporting Framework and corresponding guidelines. For questions, contact support [at] ccadb [dot] org.
```

**Note:** The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" on this page are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119).

## Table of Contents

[**Useful background**](#useful-background)
- [What is considered an incident?](#what-is-considered-an-incident)
- [What is considered an audit finding?](#what-is-considered-an-audit-finding)
- [Why is public reporting important?](#why-is-public-reporting-important)
- [What are the key characteristics of these reports?](#what-are-the-key-characteristics-of-these-reports)

> - [What should root cause analysis consider?](#what-should-root-cause-analysis-consider)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [What does root cause analysis consider?](#what-does-root-cause-analysis-consider)
```

[**Community participation in the reporting process**](#community-participation-in-the-reporting-process)
- [Who can submit an Incident Report?](#who-can-submit-an-incident-report)
- [Who can submit an Audit Finding Report?](#who-can-submit-an-audit-finding-report)
- [Are there other ways to become involved in the reporting process?](#are-there-other-ways-to-become-involved-in-the-reporting-process)
- [What Bugzilla account should I use?](#what-bugzilla-account-should-i-use)

[**Report lifecycle management**](#report-lifecycle-management)
- [How do I submit a report?](#how-do-i-submit-a-report)

> - [How should reports be scoped?](#how-should-reports-be-scoped)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [How are reports scoped?](#how-are-reports-scoped)
```

> - [What format should be used?](#what-format-should-be-used)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [What format is used?](#what-format-is-used)
```

- [When are reports expected?](#when-are-reports-expected)
- [When should reports be updated?](#when-should-reports-be-updated)

> - [How should reports be closed?](#how-should-reports-be-closed)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [How are reports closed?](#how-are-reports-closed)
```

- [Are there examples of "good" practices?](#are-there-examples-of-good-practices)
- [Are there examples of "bad" practices?](#are-there-examples-of-bad-practices)
- [Are there examples of "good" reports?](#are-there-examples-of-good-reports)

### Useful background

#### What is considered an incident?

Minimally, a failure to meet the commitments described in any of the following policies is considered an incident:
- A CA Owner's own policies (e.g., CP, CPS, or combined CP/CPS);
- Applicable requirements promulgated by the CA/Browser Forum;
- The CCADB Policy; or
- Any applicable Root Store Operator policy.

Root Store Operator policies may further describe what those individual programs consider incidents, and/or additional incident reporting expectations.

#### What is considered an audit finding?

Qualifications, non-conformities, and other deviations or omissions identified during audits are considered "findings."

These items are commonly, but not exclusively, presented as either:
- major non-conformities,
- minor non-conformities,
- qualifications,
- qualified opinions, or
- other matters.

#### Why is public reporting important?

> The public reporting process is important because it promotes continuous improvement, information sharing, and highlights opportunities to define and adopt improved practices, policies, and controls. Together, these activities help build a more secure web.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The public reporting process is important because it promotes continuous improvement, information sharing, and highlights opportunities to define and adopt improved practices, policies, and controls. Further, public reporting helps convey the implications and impact of an event so that affected stakeholders have an opportunity to assess risk and determine if it warrants their action. Together, these activities help build a more secure web. 
```

9. **Continuously improve the process**. RCA is an iterative process. Organizations should continuously refine their RCA approaches based on lessons learned from previous incidents and evolving best practices.

### Community participation in the reporting process

#### Who can submit an Incident Report?

Anyone should feel encouraged to submit an Incident Report that’s founded upon credible and well-substantiated evidence.

> Some Root Store Operator policies require CA Owners to submit an Incident Report as described on this page after self-discovering or being made aware of an Incident (e.g., receiving and corroborating an issue described in a [Certificate Problem Report](https://cabforum.org/working-groups/server/baseline-requirements/requirements/#161-definitions)).

Reviewer: Remind me of what Aaron's suggestion was re: (e.g.,)?

Author: > Like all things grammar, there are no hard and fast rules, so yeah it's certainly tinged by personal preference. It turns out that preference for a comma after i.e. and e.g. is largely determined by British vs American English. The way that I was taught to think about this is that i.e. and e.g. should be followed by a comma when they precede a list. But definitely do whatever you like :D

As a point of consistency with all other things, changing our approach now will create follow-on work.

- **To better respect a desire for individual privacy and potential risk of retaliation**, individuals participating in the reporting process should feel welcome to participate **responsibly** from an account that does not identify the individual posting or their organizational affiliation.

**For everyone else:** Create a new Bugzilla account following [these](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/createaccount.cgi) instructions. Remember, please keep all comments constructive, relevant to the corresponding report, and in line with the [CCADB Code of Conduct](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19ALqEvHtTE6OUTz2FaOXrU9gruIdvia5EDh3hXeGpZA/edit#heading=h.cumc0pgd1s7c).

### Report lifecycle management

#### How do I submit a report?

Create a new Bugzilla issue by filling out [this form](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/enter_bug.cgi?format=__default__&product=CA%20Program&component=CA%20Certificate%20Compliance&bug_type=task). 

**For Incident Reports:** 

> - The "Summary" field in Bugzilla (i.e., "Subject line") MUST begin with the CA Owner’s name, followed by a colon, and a brief title that highlights the type of incident being reported (e.g., "EXAMPLE CA OWNER: Incorrect Subject RDN Encoding"). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The "Summary" field in Bugzilla (i.e., "Subject line") MUST begin with the CA Owner’s name, followed by a colon, and a brief title that highlights the type of incident being reported (e.g., "EXAMPLE CA OWNER: Incorrect Subject RDN Encoding"). The CA Owner's name SHOULD match exactly with the CA Owner value in the CCADB."
```

- The "Description" field MAY contain a Preliminary or Full Incident Report (copied and pasted from the corresponding markdown template, as explained [below](#incident-report-templates)). 

**For Audit Finding Reports:**

> - The Summary field in Bugzilla MUST be set to CA Owner’s name, followed by a colon, and "Findings in 20XX Audit", where XX is the year the audit period or point-in-time ended (e.g., "CA ABC: Findings in 2024 Audit").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The Summary field in Bugzilla MUST be set to CA Owner’s name, followed by a colon, and "Findings in 20XX Audit", where XX is the year the audit period or point-in-time ended (e.g., "CA ABC: Findings in 2024 Audit"). The CA Owner's name SHOULD match exactly with the CA Owner value in the CCADB."
```

- The "Description" field MUST contain an Audit Finding Report (copied and pasted from the corresponding markdown template, as explained [below](#report-templates)). 

#### How are reports scoped?

**For Incident Reports:** There SHOULD be a single Incident Report for each distinct matter, and CA Owners MUST submit an additional, separate Incident Report when:
- policy requires the revocation of one or more certificates by a certain deadline, such as those in BR Section 4.9, but that deadline will not be or has not been met by the CA Owner (i.e., a delayed revocation Incident Report).
- in the process of researching one incident, another incident with a distinct root cause and/or remediation is discovered.
- after an incident is marked resolved in Bugzilla, the incident reoccurs.

> **For Audit Finding Reports:** There MUST be a single Audit Finding Report that covers all findings discovered by the audit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**For Audit Finding Reports:** There MUST be a single Audit Finding Report that covers all findings reported by the audit.
```

Author: @ChristopherRC  - doesn't "discovered" give us more desirable footing, given we're aware of:

incidents being discovered, fixed, and then... never reported?

Reviewer: Oh, good catch. I had some trail of thought for why I changed it, but (1) I don't remember at this point and (2) you're point is probably stronger anyways.

Reject!

While Full Incident Reports SHOULD be posted as soon as possible, they MUST be posted within 14 days of the incident’s initial disclosure.

**For Audit Finding Reports:** Prior to or within 7 calendar days of the corresponding audit report’s issuance date.

#### When are reports updated?

CA Owners SHOULD respond promptly to comments and questions and MUST respond to a question or request within 7 days, even if the response is only to acknowledge the request or question and provide a later date when a response will be delivered.

Open reports MUST be updated:
- on or before the "Next update" date in the "Whiteboard" field of the bug (note: CA Owners MAY request the "Next update" Whiteboard field be set by a Root Store Operator to align with a specific date related to an open Action Item.);
- within 7 days, if a "Next update" date is not recorded;
- in response to community questions or comments as described above; or
- when Action Items are changed, completed, or delayed.

> In the case of Incident Reports with a Whiteboard field of "revocation-delay", reports SHOULD be updated every 3 days and no less frequently than every 7 days to describe a summary of: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the case of Incident Reports with a Whiteboard field of "revocation-delay", reports SHOULD be updated every 3 days and MUST be updated no less frequently than every 7 days to describe a summary of: 
```

- the number of certificates that have been revoked;

> - the number of certificates that have NOT YET been revoked; and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the number of certificates that have not yet been revoked; and
```

- the number of certificates planned for revocation that have expired.

#### How are reports closed?

If (1) all Action Items are marked as complete and (2) there are no outstanding comments or questions that need to be addressed, CA Owners MUST clearly communicate in a Bugzilla comment when they believe the report can be closed. This is accomplished by writing a short-summary that includes:
- a description of the incident, its root cause(s), and remediation.
- a summary of all ongoing commitments made in response to the incident.
- an attestation that all Action Items have been completed.

CA Owners MUST use the template [below](#incident-closure-summary) to indicate requested closure of an Incident or Audit Finding Report. Upon doing so, a final call for comments will be made by a Bugzilla moderator, and the report will be closed accordingly.

### Report Templates

> The templates below describe the expected contents of an Incident Report. When responding to an incident, the latest version of these templates MUST be relied upon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The templates below describe the expected contents of an Incident or Audit Finding Report. When responding to an incident, the latest version of these templates MUST be relied upon.
```

Reviewer: Would we ever update a template and not update this page in general? I don't think so? 

Maybe we instead say "the latest version of this guidance MUST be relied upon" or something similar to not imply that the templates themselves are versioned outside of this overarching guidance?

## Full Incident Report

### Summary

- **CA Owner CCADB Unique ID:** 
- **Incident description:** 

> - **Timeline Summary:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Timeline summary:**
```
Testing a suggestion and a comment in one post.

Suggested for consistency.

Reviewer: Okay, I now see us going both ways with capitalizing fields. What is our preference, and then lets make it match.

Reviewer: I think there are more capitalizations than not.

Author: Only capitalize proper nouns.

I did a lower-casing session on headings earlier, didn't think to do fields.

>    - **Non-compliance Start Date:** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - **Non-compliance start date:** 
```

>    - **Non-compliance Identified Date:** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - **Non-compliance identified date:** 
```

>    - **Non-compliance End Date:** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - **Non-compliance end date:** 
```

- **Relevant policies:** 
- **Source of incident disclosure:** 

### Impact

- **Total number of certificates:**
- **Total number of "remaining valid" certificates:** 
- **Affected certificate types:** 
- **Incident heuristic:** 
- **Was issuance stopped in response to this incident, and why or why not?:** 
- **Analysis:** 

> - **Additional Considerations:** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Additional considerations:** 
```

For consistency

### Timeline

*Note: see the Incident Reporting Guidelines on CCADB.org for instructions and expected content.*

### Related Incidents

| Bug                                | Date                        | Description                                                            |
|------------------------------------|-----------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [Related Bug ID](Related Bug URL)  | Date Related Bug was opened | A description of how the subject Bug is related to the Bug referenced. |

### Root Cause Analysis

** Issue #: Issue Title**
- **Description:** 

> - **Issue Onset:** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Issue onset:** 
```

> - **Issue Detection:** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Issue detection:** 
```

> - **Issue Resolution:** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Issue resolution:** 
```

> - **Symptoms that Led to Detection:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Symptoms that led to detection:**
```

> - **How the Issue Avoided Detection:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **How the issue avoided detection:**
```

> - **Root Cause Analysis Methodology Used:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Root Cause Analysis methodology used:**
```

### Lessons Learned

- **What went well:** 
- **What didn’t go well:** 
- **Where we got lucky:** 
- **Other:** 

### Action Items

| Action Item | Kind    | Corresponding Root Cause(s) | Due Date   | Status |
| ----------- | ----    | --------------------------- | ---------- | -------|
| Example     | Prevent | Root Cause # 1              | 2025-01-19 | Value  |

### Appendix

*Note: see the Incident Reporting Guidelines on CCADB.org for instructions and expected content.*

```

#### Audit Finding Report

```markdown

## Audit Finding Report

### Summary

> - **CA Owner CCADB Unique ID:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **CA Owner CCADB unique ID:**
```

- **Audit Report URL:**

> - **Audit Type:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Audit type:**
```

- **Audit Firm:**

> - **Audit Period:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Audit period:**
```

> - **Audit Report Date:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Audit Report date:**
```

### Findings

** Issue #: Issue Title**
- **Description:** 

> - **Issue Onset:** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Issue onset:** 
```

> - **Issue Detection:** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Issue detection:** 
```

> - **Issue Resolution:** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Issue resolution:** 
```

> - **How the Issue Avoided Detection:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **How the issue avoided detection:**
```

### Action Items

| Action Item | Kind    | Corresponding Issue         | Due Date   | Status |
| ----------- | ----    | --------------------------- | ---------- | -------|
| Example     | Prevent | Root Cause # 1              | 2025-01-19 | Value  |

```

#### Closure Report

```markdown

### Report Closure Summary

> - **Incident Description:** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Incident description:** 
```

- **Incident Root Cause(s):**  

> - **Remediation Description:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Remediation description:**
```

> - **Commitment Summary:**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Commitment summary:**  
```

All Action Items disclosed in this report have been completed as described, and we request its closure.

```

### Report field definitions and expectations

The following sections are intended to describe expected Incident Report and Audit Finding Report content. All fields are mandatory for the corresponding report type, except when described below.

#### Incident Reports

**Summary:** The Summary section contains a short description of the nature of the issue. This provides just enough context for new readers to understand the details in the rest of the report. 

| Field                           | Description                              |  
|---------------------------------|------------------------------------------| 

> | **CA Owner CCADB Unique ID*** | The CCADB Unique ID value corresponding to the CA Owner's "CA Owner/Certificate" record disclosed in the CCADB. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **CA Owner CCADB unique ID*** | The CCADB unique ID value corresponding to the CA Owner's "CA Owner/Certificate" record disclosed in the CCADB. |
```

| **Incident description** | A short description of the nature of the issue. This provides just enough context for new readers to understand the details of the incident. |

> | **Timeline Summary*** | Describe (1) when the non-compliance began (2), when the non-compliance was detected, and (3) when the non-compliance ended or is expected to end. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Timeline summary*** | Describe (1) when the non-compliance began (2), when the non-compliance was detected, and (3) when the non-compliance ended or is expected to end. |
```

**Note**: If notified of an incident by an external, third party reporter, please respect their privacy by *only* disclosing their name if affirmatively approved to do so (e.g., say "we received a report from a community member" instead of explicitly naming individuals). Fields marked with an asterisk (*) are not required in Preliminary Incident Reports if submitted by a third party reporter.

**Impact:** The Impact section contains a description of the size and nature of the incident. For example: how many certificates, OCSP responses, or CRLs were affected; whether the affected objects share features (such as issuance time, signature algorithm, or validation type); and whether the CA Owner had to cease issuance during the incident. 

If certificates are impacted, the Impact Section MUST include the following information:  

| Field                           | Description                              |  
|---------------------------------|------------------------------------------| 
| **Total number of certificates** | The total count of all certificates affected by the issue(s) described in this Incident Report, including expired and revoked certificates.|

> | **Total number of "remaining valid" certificates** | The total count of certificates affected by the issue(s) described in this Incident Report, minus expired and revoked certificates. Minimally, this set of certificates MUST be disclosed in the Appendix section of this report. |

Reviewer: Are we intending to have RFC2119 statements throughout this section?

Reviewer: I think the answer is "yes" so I've suggested more changes that align with this.

| **Was issuance stopped in response to this incident, and why or why not?** | Yes/No with explanation (e.g., "Yes. As described in the incident timeline, issuance was stopped after learning of this issue to correct the corresponding certificate profile.")  |
| **Analysis** | Required when the Whiteboard field contains ‘revocation-delay’, the factors and rationales behind the decision to delay revocation (including detailed and substantiated explanations of how extensive harm would result to third parties–such as essential public services or widely relied-upon systems–and why the situation is exceptionally rare and unavoidable).|

> | **Additional Considerations** | This field is optional. Share any additional considerations that might be useful in describing the size and nature of the incident. For example, if the issue affected pre-certificates and "final" certificates differently, describe how and why in more detail here.|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Additional considerations** | This field is optional. Share any additional considerations that might be useful in describing the size and nature of the incident. For example, if the issue affected pre-certificates and "final" certificates differently, describe how and why in more detail here.|
```

> **Timeline:** The Timeline section includes a detailed timeline of all events and actions leading up to and taken during and after the incident. The timeline must include not just the actual discovery of the incident and subsequent events, but also relevant events occurring beforehand (e.g. something changed or was introduced). All times MUST be in UTC OR UTC+local offset, and SHOULD have at least minute-level granularity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Timeline:** The Timeline section includes a detailed timeline of all events and actions leading up to and taken during and after the incident. The timeline MUST include not just the actual discovery of the incident and subsequent events, but also relevant events occurring beforehand (e.g. something changed or was introduced). All times MUST be in UTC OR UTC+local offset, and SHOULD have at least minute-level granularity.
```

> Expected Timeline elements:

Reviewer: I'm wondering if we want to prescribe how we want to see timeline updates if something needs to be corrected. Do we want the entire timeline copied and corrected, or do we just prefer a one line update?

- The time at which the CA Owner concluded and disclosed the scope and impact of the incident
- The time(s) at which the CA Owner is expected to complete revocation of affected certificates (if applicable, but required when Whiteboard field contains ‘revocation-delay’)
- The time(s) at which the CA Owner actually completed revocation of affected certificates (if applicable, but required when Whiteboard field contains ‘revocation-delay’)
- The time at which the incident ended
- The times at which issuance ceased and resumed (if applicable)

**Related Incidents:** The Related Incidents section includes a list of all incidents disclosed to the ['CA Certificate Compliance' Bugzilla Component](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/buglist.cgi?product=CA%20Program&component=CA%20Certificate%20Compliance&resolution=---) related to this incident that have taken place minimally in the last two (2) years. "Related incidents" MUST consider incidents beyond those corresponding to the CA Owner subject of this report.

| Field                           | Description                              |  
|---------------------------------|------------------------------------------| 

> | **Related Bug ID** | The Bugzilla ID corresponding to the related incident. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Related incident ID** | The Bugzilla ID corresponding to the related incident. |
```

> | **Related Bug URL** | The Bugzilla URL corresponding to the related incident. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Related incident URL** | The Bugzilla URL corresponding to the related incident. |
```

> | **Opened Date** | The date the related incident was opened. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Opened date** | The date the related incident was opened. |
```

| **Description** | A description of how the related incident is similar to the subject incident report. |

**Root Causes:** The Root Causes section contains a detailed analysis of the conditions which combined to give rise to the issue. It is unusual for an incident to have a single root cause; often there is a confluence of several issues such as a software bug, insufficient checks, and a malformed request. Make sure that all contributing causes are identified and described, including noting when they first arose and how they avoided detection until they were discovered or identified.  

| Field                           | Description                              |  
|---------------------------------|------------------------------------------| 
| **Description** | A detailed description of the specific issue.|

> | **Issue Onset** | Date when the issue began. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Issue onset** | Date when the issue began. |
```

> | **Issue Detection** | Date when the issue was detected or otherwise made known. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Issue detection** | Date when the issue was detected or otherwise made known. |
```

> | **Issue Resolution** | Actual or planned date when the issue will be considered resolved. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Issue resolution** | Actual or planned date when the issue will be considered resolved. |
```

> | **Symptoms that Led to Detection** | A detailed description of the circumstances that led to the detection of the issue. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Symptoms that led to detection** | A detailed description of the circumstances that led to the detection of the issue. |
```

> | **How the Issue Avoided Detection** | A detailed description of how the issue was not detected earlier. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **How the issue avoided detection** | A detailed description of how the issue was not detected earlier. |
```

> | **Root Cause Analysis Methodology Used** | This field is optional, but recommended. A description of the methodology used to derive the issue described above (e.g., "5-Whys", Fishbone Diagram, Pareto Analysis, etc.) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Root Cause Analysis methodology used** | This field is optional, but recommended. A description of the methodology used to derive the issue described above (e.g., "5-Whys", Fishbone Diagram, Pareto Analysis, etc.) |
```

| **What didn’t go well?** | A list of things that caused the incident to have more impact than it otherwise would have, such as missing checks or unclear documentation. Each item here MUST have at least one corresponding Action Item below and SHOULD provide opportunities for others to ensure they make similar improvements if they haven’t already. |
| **Where we got lucky?** | A list of things that went well, but which cannot be relied upon, such as early detection by an external security researcher or limited impact simply due to a small number of requests. Items here SHOULD generally also have corresponding Action Items, so that the CA Owner doesn’t have to rely on luck in the future. |
| **Other** | Any other type of "lesson learned" that does not otherwise fit in the above categories, e.g., internal/external circumstances or environmental conditions; discovery of problematic processes, policies, or workflows; communication gaps; resource challenges; task ownership; overlooked warning signs; underutilized tools; etc. Again, each item mentioned here MUST have at least one corresponding Action Item. |

> **Action Items:** The Action Items section contains a list of remediation items that will be undertaken to ensure that similar incidents do not reoccur in the future. For example, if the Whiteboard field contains ‘revocation-delay’, the Action Items list MUST include steps reasonably calculated to prevent or reduce future revocation delays. Note that it is not sufficient for these action items to simply stop this incident, they MUST create additional protections to prevent future incidents.

Reviewer: Similar, to my comment in the timeline section, do we want one line AI updates, or the entire table repeated to include whatever changed.

| **Subject** | The Subject field of the Certificate. |
| **Issuer** | The Issuer field of the Certificate.|
| **Not Before** | The notBefore field of the Certificate. |
| **Not After** | The notAfter field of the Certificate. |
| **Serial #** | The Serial Number field of the Certificate, in hex. |
| **Is Revoked?** | "Yes", "Planned","Delayed", or "N/A" (for expired) |
| **Revocation Date** | Actual Date, Planned Date, or "N/A" |
| **Revocation Reason** | The reasonCode corresponding with the Certificate's entry on the CRL. |

When the incident being reported involves an S/MIME certificate, if disclosure of personally identifiable information in the certificate MAY be contrary to applicable law, please provide at least the certificate serial number and SHA256 hash of the certificate.

#### Audit Finding Reports 

**Summary:** The Summary section contains background information to provide context for readers to understand the details in the rest of the report. 

| Field                           | Description                              |  
|---------------------------------|------------------------------------------| 

> | **CA Owner CCADB Unique ID** | The CCADB Unique ID value corresponding to the CA Owner's "CA Owner/Certificate" record disclosed in the CCADB. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **CA Owner CCADB unique ID** | The CCADB unique ID value corresponding to the CA Owner's "CA Owner/Certificate" record disclosed in the CCADB. |
```

| **Audit Report URL** | A publicly-accessible link to the corresponding audit letter. |

> | **Audit Type** | Describe the audit scheme and criteria assessed by the audit. (e.g., "WebTrust Principles and Criteria for Certification Authorities – SSL Baseline – Version 2.8)  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Audit type** | Describe the audit scheme and criteria assessed by the audit. (e.g., "WebTrust Principles and Criteria for Certification Authorities – SSL Baseline – Version 2.8)  |
```

| **Audit Firm** | The name of the organization that performed the audit. |

> | **Audit Period** | The period covered by the audit. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Audit period** | The period of time covered by the audit. |
```

> | **Audit Report Date** | The audit report date.  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Audit Report date** | The audit report date.  |
```

**Findings:** The Finding section should contain a short description of the nature of each finding. This provides context for the reader to understand the nature of the non-compliance identified by the Auditor. Each finding presented in the audit letter MUST be covered with the following information:

| Field                           | Description                              |  
|---------------------------------|------------------------------------------| 
| **Description** | A detailed description of the specific issue.|

> | **Issue Onset** | Date when the issue began. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Issue onset** | Date when the issue began. |
```

> | **Issue Detection** | Date when the issue was detected or otherwise made known. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Issue detection** | Date when the issue was detected or otherwise made known. |
```

> | **Issue Resolution** | Actual or planned date when the issue will be considered resolved. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Issue resolution** | Actual or planned date when the issue will be considered resolved. |
```

> | **How the Issue Avoided Detection** | A detailed description of how the issue was not detected earlier. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **How the issue avoided detection** | A detailed description of how the issue was not detected earlier. |
```

| Field                           | Description                              |  
|---------------------------------|------------------------------------------| 
| **Action Item Description** | A detailed description of the action to be taken. |
| **Kind** | A classification of whether the action will help Prevent future incidents, Mitigate the impact of future incidents, or Detect future incidents. CA Owners are encouraged to propose action items in all three categories, with an emphasis on Prevent and Mitigate. |
| **Corresponding Issue(s)** | The specific issue that the Action intends to remediate. |
| **Due Date** | A date by which the action item will be complete. |
| **Status** | Describe the status of the action item using either "Ongoing", "Complete", "Delayed", or "Canceled". |

##### Incident Closure Summary

The Incident Closure Summary allows a CA Owner to signal they believe an incident is ready for closure.

| Field                           | Description                              |  
|---------------------------------|------------------------------------------| 

> | **Incident Description** | A few sentences summarizing the incident. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Incident description** | A few sentences summarizing the incident. |
```

| **Incident Root Cause(s)** | A few sentences summarizing the root cause(s). |

> | **Remediation Description** | A few sentences summarizing the incident's remediation. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Remediation description** | A few sentences summarizing the incident's remediation. |
```

> | **Commitment Summary** | A list of any ongoing commitments made in response to this incident beyond those described in the Action Items section. Ongoing commitments can be a useful representation of a CA Owner's continuous improvement efforts and should be considered distinct from, but complementary to Action Items included in the report given a broader scope and long-term or continuous timeframe that would otherwise result in the subject incident report being open for an extended period of time. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Commitment summary** | A list of any ongoing commitments made in response to this incident beyond those described in the Action Items section. Ongoing commitments can be a useful representation of a CA Owner's continuous improvement efforts and should be considered distinct from, but complementary to Action Items included in the report given a broader scope and long-term or continuous timeframe that would otherwise result in the subject incident report being open for an extended period of time. |
```
